README.md, before:

# Lib Name Here

# Table of Contents

- [Quick Start](#quick-start)

  - [Schema Definitions and Type Inference](#schema-definitions-and-type-inference)
  - [Typeguards and Validations](#typeguards-and-validations)
  - [Parsing and Coercion](#parsing-and-coercion)

- [Core](#core)

  - [Schema](#schema)
  - [Refine](#refine)
  - [Coerce](#coerce)
  - [Narrow](#narrow)
  - [Validation Result](#validation-result)

- [Simple Schema Types](#simple-schema-types)

  - [Boolean](#boolean)
  - [Date](#date)
  - [Enum](#enum)
  - [Fun](#fun)
  - [Literal](#literal)
  - [Number](#number)
  - [String](#string)

- [Composite Schema Types](#composite-schema-types)

  - [Array](#array)
  - [Object](#object)
  - [Record](#record)
  - [Tuple](#tuple)

- [Logic](#logic)

  - [And](#and)
  - [Not](#not)
  - [Or](#or)
  - [XOR](#xor)

- [Utility](#utility)
  - [Conversion Graph](#conversion-graph)
  - [Lazy](#lazy)
  - [Optional, Required, Nullable & Nullish](#optional-required-nullable--nullish)
  - [Partial & DeepPartial](#partial--deeppartial)
  - [ToJsonSchema](#tojsonschema)

## Quick Start

### Schema Definitions and Type Inference

To get started you only need a few schema types and some utility functions. Have a look at this user type

```ts
const user = object({
  name: string(),
  dateOfBirth: optional(date()),
});
type User = InferType<typeof user>;
```

This defines a schema `user` that has a required name and an optional age. If the age is present then it must be a number larger than zero.

We also infer the type of the Schema which is equivalent to

```ts
type User = {
  name: string;
  dateOfBirth?: Date | undefined;
};
```

### Typeguards and Validations

This schema can now be used as a type guard

```ts
function processUser(value: unknown): string {
  if (user.accepts(value)) {
    // typescript infers value to be of type User
    return value.name;
  }
  // value is of unknown type down here!
  return "not a user!";
}
```

Or if you need full validation errors

```ts
const validationErrors = user.validate({ name: 12 });
console.log(translate(validationErrors));
```

will print out

```
{ name: 'value was of type number expected string' }
```

> For the sake of demonstration we use `translate()` to make the validation object more readable. Actually, `name` is not a string but an object containing more information about the validation error.

### Parsing and Coercion

The schema type also has a parse function built in. This function will built a new object that conforms to the schema. By default however, the schema won't be able to convert types. For example

```ts
user.parse({ name: "Joe", dateOfBirth: "1999-01-01" });
```

will throw a validation error because `"1999-01-01"` is a string and not a Date object. You can fix this problem like this

```ts
const coercedDate = coerce(date(), (v) => {
  if (typeof v === "string" || typeof v === "number") {
    return new Date(v);
  }
  return v;
});
const user = object({
  name: string(),
  dateOfBirth: optional(coercedDate),
});
```

The coerce function applies the `Date` only if the value is a string or a number and does not touch any other value (including dates).

> The usecase of coercion from string to Date is so common that we have `coercedDate()` as a builtin function

## Core

### Schema

### Refine

### Coerce

By default, a schema will not try to convert values during the parse step. So a `date()` schema will only accept `Date` objects. The parse function will just return its inputs, it is the identity function. If you want to parse values like `1998-10-05` as dates however, you will need coercion.

`coerce` takes a schema and a function `(v: unknown) => unknown` that may or may not convert the given value. Currently, this function is applied during parsing before the validation step and _again_ for the actual parsing. Coercion is not applied in `accepts` or `validate` so a `coercedDate()` will still accept only dates (it is a `Schema<Date>` after all!). You can override this behaviour with the `withCoercion` option.

### Transform and Narrow

### Validation Result

## Simple Schema Types

### Boolean

### Date

### Enum

### Fun

### Literal

### Number

### String

## Composite Schema Types

### Array

### Object

### Record

### Tuple

## Logic

### And

### Not

### Or

### XOR

## Utility

### Conversion Graph

### Lazy

### Optional, Required, Nullable & Nullish

### Partial & DeepPartial

### ToJsonSchema

Commit message:

add coerced simple schemas and fix required types

README.md, after:

# Lib Name Here

# Table of Contents

- [Quick Start](#quick-start)

  - [Schema Definitions and Type Inference](#schema-definitions-and-type-inference)
  - [Typeguards and Validations](#typeguards-and-validations)
  - [Parsing and Coercion](#parsing-and-coercion)

- [Core](#core)

  - [Schema](#schema)
  - [Refine](#refine)
  - [Coerce](#coerce)
  - [Narrow](#narrow)
  - [Validation Result](#validation-result)

- [Simple Schema Types](#simple-schema-types)

  - [Boolean](#boolean)
  - [Date](#date)
  - [Enum](#enum)
  - [Fun](#fun)
  - [Literal](#literal)
  - [Number](#number)
  - [String](#string)

- [Composite Schema Types](#composite-schema-types)

  - [Array](#array)
  - [Object](#object)
  - [Record](#record)
  - [Tuple](#tuple)

- [Logic](#logic)

  - [And](#and)
  - [Not](#not)
  - [Or](#or)
  - [XOR](#xor)

- [Utility](#utility)
  - [Conversion Graph](#conversion-graph)
  - [Lazy](#lazy)
  - [Optional, Required, Nullable & Nullish](#optional-required-nullable--nullish)
  - [Partial & DeepPartial](#partial--deeppartial)
  - [ToJsonSchema](#tojsonschema)

## Quick Start

### Schema Definitions and Type Inference

To get started you only need a few schema types and some utility functions. Have a look at this user type

```ts
const user = object({
  name: string(),
  dateOfBirth: optional(date()),
});
type User = InferType<typeof user>;
```

This defines a schema `user` that has a required name and an optional age. If the age is present then it must be a number larger than zero.

We also infer the type of the Schema which is equivalent to

```ts
type User = {
  name: string;
  dateOfBirth?: Date | undefined;
};
```

### Typeguards and Validations

This schema can now be used as a type guard

```ts
function processUser(value: unknown): string {
  if (user.accepts(value)) {
    // typescript infers value to be of type User
    return value.name;
  }
  // value is of unknown type down here!
  return "not a user!";
}
```

Or if you need full validation errors

```ts
const validationErrors = user.validate({ name: 12 });
console.log(translate(validationErrors));
```

will print out

```
{ name: 'value was of type number expected string' }
```

> For the sake of demonstration we use `translate()` to make the validation object more readable. Actually, `name` is not a string but an object containing more information about the validation error.

### Parsing and Coercion

The schema type also has a parse function built in. This function will built a new object that conforms to the schema. By default however, the schema won't be able to convert types. For example

```ts
user.parse({ name: "Joe", dateOfBirth: "1999-01-01" });
```

will throw a validation error because `"1999-01-01"` is a string and not a Date object. You can fix this problem like this

```ts
const coercedDate = coerce(date(), (v) => {
  if (typeof v === "string" || typeof v === "number") {
    return new Date(v);
  }
  return v;
});
const user = object({
  name: string(),
  dateOfBirth: optional(coercedDate),
});
```

The coerce function applies the `Date` only if the value is a string or a number and does not touch any other value (including dates).

> The usecase of coercion from string to Date is so common that we have `coercedDate()` as a builtin function

## Core

### Schema

### Refine

### Coerce

By default, a schema will not try to convert values during the parse step. In that case, the parse function will return its inputs without changing them. If you want to parse values like `1998-10-05` as dates however, you will need coercion.

`coerce` takes a schema and a function `(v: unknown) => unknown` that may or may not convert the given value. Currently, this function is applied during `parse` before the validation step and _again_ for the actual parsing. Coercion is not applied in `accepts` or `validate` so a `coercedDate()` will still accept only dates (it is a `Schema<Date>` after all!). You can override this behaviour using the `withCoercion` option.

The predefined coerced schemas are

```
coercedBoolean,
coercedDate,
coercedNumber,
coercedString
```

They are implemented using the default coercion of javascript. Note that this comes with all the pitfalls and weirdnesses of javascript. For example `[]` is coerced to `0`, `''` and `true` with to coercedNumber, coercedString and coercedBoolean respectively.

### Transform and Narrow

After you parsed a value, you might want to further transform it. For example the schema `defaultValue(optional(number()), 42)` will parse `undefined` to 42. This schema has type `Schema<number | undefined, number>` indicating that it will still accept `undefined` but will always parse to a number.

The `defaultValue` function is implemented using `narrow()`. This function takes a schema and a projection function `(v: O) => P` where `P extends O`. This means that the narrowed type must still be assignable to the ouput type.

If you need even more powerful transformations you can use `transform()`. This function takes a schema and an arbitrary transformation `(v: O) => P`. This is very similar to `narrow()` except for the missing contraint on `P`. With this function you can implement a schema like this

```
transform(array(number()), values => Math.max(...values))
```

This schema accepts an array of numbers and parses them into their maximum value. This schema has a type like `Schema<number[], number>`.

### Validation Result

## Simple Schema Types

### Boolean

### Date

### Enum

### Fun

### Literal

### Number

### String

## Composite Schema Types

### Array

### Object

### Record

### Tuple

## Logic

### And

### Not

### Or

### XOR

## Utility

### Conversion Graph

### Lazy

### Optional, Required, Nullable & Nullish

### Partial & DeepPartial

### ToJsonSchema
